Welcome to this section of the course.
Now, there isn't really a huge difference between the analyses in the previous sections and the analyses
in this section.
It's a slight shift in focus from what's happening at the level of the entire layer to what's happening
to individual embeddings, vectors coming from each token in a text sequence.
So the idea of this section is to track how the embeddings vectors change as they pass through the transformer
layers and how they interact with other tokens.
So yeah, it's a slight shift in conceptualization and terminology, but not really fundamentally different
from the material so far in this part of the course.
Anyway, the goal of this video is to teach you about calculating how these embeddings vectors are rotating
as they pass from one transformer block to the next.
I will show a bit of math and a Python demo here, and then you're going to have a couple of code challenges
where you can continue exploring these concepts for different analyses.
I'd like to start by reminding you that tokens are represented as vectors in a high dimensional space.
This screenshot here shows the slide from way back towards the beginning of the course, when I explained
the idea of representing words using dense vectors in, in this case, a two dimensional space.
Now, the thing is that we cannot actually visualize or even conceptualize a high dimensional space
that's used in language models.
But the cool thing about linear algebra is that the conceptualizations and the math that you work out
for two dimensions apply to any number of dimensions.
So let's think about the word cat not as a box with some coordinate, but instead as a vector that starts
at the origin of this space and ends at the coordinate of the token in this embedding space.
Now this is the initial embeddings for the word cat.
And as you know, the point of all the transformer blocks is to slowly transform this vector from representing
the token for cat to making a prediction about what token should come next.
And how does that transformation happen?
Well, within each transformer you have two sublayers that calculate these little adjustments that get
added onto the vector.
Those adjustments depend on the context of other tokens Surrounding the appearance of the word cat.
So let's imagine that other words in the sentence are, for example, the word mean or ferocious or
unfriendly.
Those tokens are going to pull down this vector a little bit on the friendliness dimension.
So now the token embeddings vector of the word cat has been rotated a tiny bit like this.
And also just as a reminder that these embeddings dimensions generally do not have human interpretable
labels like friendliness or size.
That's really just for this toy example.
So we have a picture to look at and some math to work through.
But this is the idea.
The embeddings vector starts off pointing in one direction, and then each transformer block that it
passes through, the vector gets rotated by some amount according to the context And how much does this
vector get rotated?
That is the question that I will answer on this slide.
In fact, to answer this question, I'm going to start with the formula for cosine similarity.
So let's say we want to calculate the cosine similarity between the original vector.
We can call that x and the adjusted vector after going through a transformer block.
We can call that vector y.
Now you already know how to do that.
And we've done this earlier in the course.
But the question here in this video is not about cosine similarity.
It's about the angle between the two vectors.
So to get that angle all we need to do is isolate theta on the left hand side of this equation.
So this is the angle here.
But there's a lot of pixels in this equation.
So for simplicity I'm going to rewrite this equation using this more compact notation.
These angle brackets here are often used to indicate the dot product.
So this would be the dot product between vector x and vector y.
And these vertical lines here indicate the vector norms.
Sometimes in linear algebra you will see double vertical lines.
Here you might also see a little two subscript here, but I'm just using one vertical line just for
simplicity.
So these two equations here are the same.
This one is just more compact in terms of notation.
Now to isolate theta you'd like to do something like dividing by the cosine.
But the cosine is an operator.
It's a function.
It's not something we can just divide by.
However there is an inverse cosine function which is also called the arc cosine, and that will cancel
out the cosine function on the left.
Leaving us with just theta.
So we can take the inverse cosine or the arc cosine of both sides of the equation.
And then we have a formula for the angle between two vectors.
This result is in units of radians, and we can convert it to degrees by multiplying by 180 over pi.
So this is the theory.
It's surprisingly simple once you are familiar with cosine similarity.
And this is actually one of the things I really love about linear algebra.
Seemingly complicated linear algebra operations are actually quite simple once you have a decent foundation.
Anyway, now I will describe what I'll do in the Python demo.
We are going to work with ChatGPT to Excel because it has lots of layers, lots of transformer blocks.
So that's pretty useful for this analysis.
To create the activations for the token embeddings vectors, I will use the sentences that all contain
her somewhere in each sentence.
We've worked with this sentence data set before.
It is 54 sentences that I got from Claude I.
Now these sentences have different token lengths.
So this Python demo will also be a nice reminder of padding sequences to create batches of equal lengths
when you start from sentences that have unequal lengths.
After pushing through these sequences through the model, I'll get all of the Hidden States activations.
You can see that there are 49 hidden layers for 48 transformer blocks, so eight tokens and an embedding
dimension of 1600.
The main analysis in the code is to calculate the angle of the embeddings vector from each layer, each
transformer block relative to the previous layer, so that is equivalent to what I described in the
previous slide, where the context surrounding the token will modify the embeddings vector at each transformer
block, and we want to calculate the angle from each transformer to the next.
Okay.
And that's what you see in this plot here.
The x axis shows depth into the model or the transformer block index, and the y and the y axis shows
the angle from the previous layer to the current layer for the target token.
So that's the token word here.
And then I also used a non-target reference.
And for that I use the token immediately preceding the target word.
That's a pretty interesting comparison, because the context for the target and non-target words are
nearly identical, but the words themselves are all different from each other.
And actually, there is another comparison that I have in the code, which is randomly selected tokens
across randomly selected layers.
I did not include that visualization in this plot because it's so much higher and it's really noisy,
but it's interesting to look at and to ponder.
And so I will show it when I switch to code.
And also in the code, I will convert the y axis into angles so that they're easier to interpret.
Now there are several features that we see in this plot that are pretty interesting to think about.
First is the huge change from the very beginning as we transition from the initial embeddings to the
first transformer block.
And that's actually pretty sensible.
The initial embeddings have zero context modulation.
And then the first transformer block has a lot of work to do to incorporate the initial context.
And then you see this gentle but consistent and fairly linear looking decrease in the angle as we get
deeper into the model.
So it seems like the adjustments from one transformer to the next are relatively small and getting smaller
as we go deeper into the model.
And then there's this big jump right at the very end, which can be interpreted as the final transformer
block, making the last adjustments to the embeddings vectors before they get sent out to the embeddings
and a new token is generated.
And by the way, these thin lines are for each of the 54 sentences, and the thick lines show the average.
And because we have a lot of repetitions here we have 54 sentences.
So 54 targets and 54 non targets.
We can actually perform a statistical analysis.
In particular it kind of looks like the blue line is higher than the red line in early blocks.
Whereas the red line is higher than the blue line in later blocks.
And so the final part of this demo is to run a t test on the angles of the vector changes at each layer.
And those results you see here.
So there are green circles where the target angles are statistically significantly larger than the non-target
angles.
And then we have blue squares for the opposite.
So the non-target angles are significantly bigger than the target angles and red X's, where there are
no statistically significant differences.
In other words, the angle of the change in the embeddings vectors from one layer to the next is roughly
the same for targets and non targets.
Now, I don't want to over interpret this plot or this result, because it's only based on 54 short
sentences that are all fairly homogeneous in the sense that the target token is always the same.
But the interpretation of this kind of finding would be that as we get deeper into the model, the adjustments
for the target word have to increase.
In this case, because the pronoun her needs to be bound to other words in the text that the word her
references.
So that would be the interpretation.
Anyway, let's now switch to Python and see what the code looks like.
here are the libraries we will use here.
And also I will use the Scipy.stats library for running t tests towards the end of the code.
Here I'm importing GPT two XL.
This takes a few minutes, so I probably should have started running this before I switched to Python.
But anyway, here are the sentences these you've seen before.
And uh, yeah, let me see.
Uh, yeah.
All of this code you've seen before as well.
So I'm just tokenizing them.
Uh, here.
I'm tokenizing them here.
I'm tokenizing the target word her.
I've also talked about this issue with the space before.
So I'll cue up that cell to run.
And here is where we tokenize all of those sentences.
And just as a reminder, the issue with creating batches from these sentences is that the different
sentences have different numbers of tokens.
And so therefore we need to pad all of the tokens such that all the sequences are exactly the same length
within a batch.
So to do that, we use the end of sequence token as the pad token, and then we write padding equals
true.
And then we get padded tokens here which we can then push through the model.
This is all stuff that I have described earlier in the course.
Okay.
So this will also take a about a minute on the CPU.
Of course it's much faster on the GPU than it's like a second maybe.
But uh, yeah, we don't really need the GPU for this, uh, entire script.
Okay, so then, yeah, I'm just grabbing the number of hidden layers, and here I'm just printing out
the shape the size of one of the hidden layers.
This is really just confirmation that we get some expected results.
And now here is where we do the analysis.
So I'm looping over all of the sentences here I'm finding the target.
Where again, this is code that you've seen in earlier videos.
But the main idea is that the target word her is in a different index location.
So different location in each sentence.
So therefore we need to loop over all of the sentences and find the index of the target word in each
individual sentence.
Here I'm starting the loop over all of the layers.
Notice that I start the loop at index one and not index zero.
And the reason is that what I want to calculate in this analysis is the change, or the angle of the
change in the vector from each transformer block relative to the previous transformer block.
So outputs dot hidden states layer I.
So this is the current layer in this for loop minus one.
And then for convenience I call that vector v.
This I call vector u that is still this sentence, this target location, but the current layer.
Okay.
So then detach.
And the squeeze is basically just to get rid of these singleton dimensions here.
Of course this is the embeddings dimensionality here.
So that means that the result here this v is going to be one vector with 1600 elements in it.
So v and then u.
And here is where I directly translate the formula that I showed in the slides a moment ago into code.
So we have the dot product between v and u divided by or normalized by the product of the norms of the
two vectors.
And then here I apply the arc cosine.
This is the inverse cosine function.
And the result here is the angle between these two vectors.
And again it's in units of radians.
And again the idea is that if a particular embeddings vector doesn't really change after the transformer
block.
Let's say the attention mechanism looks at the vector as like yep, this is good as it is, we don't
need to do any adjustments.
Then that angle is going to look basically the same before and after the transformer block, in which
case the angle will be zero.
On the other hand, if the transformer block really needs to make some pretty significant adjustments
to the vector, then that vector will be rotated and then vector u will point off in a different direction
from vector v, and then this angle will be larger.
Now the adjustments to these vectors is not only about changing the angles.
That is to say, it's not the case that the vectors necessarily stay exactly the same length, they
just rotate a little bit.
The attention and MLP adjustments can also change the length of the vectors.
They can get shorter, they can get longer, and the angle does actually not really capture those changes
in lengths.
For example, let's imagine that a transformer block decides that a vector needs to be a little bit
shorter, but pointed in the same direction.
In that case, there's no rotation, so the angle is going to be zero where the whereas the length of
that vector might actually have changed a lot.
So that is something that we would not be able to detect with this analysis.
But we will be able to detect it by measuring the change in the length of the vector.
That's what we're going to do in a couple of videos for now.
Later in this section.
Okay.
Anyway, I just wanted to discuss the interpretation of this result a little bit more.
So this is for the target words here I have exactly the same analysis, but this is for all of the tokens
Preceding the target word.
Now, this is pretty interesting because this is exactly the same token in every single sentence.
By definition, it's always the word her.
But the word preceding her is different in every sentence.
So you know here it's introduced, informed, married and so on.
So in this case it's still the same token across the different layers.
But each sentence is going to have a different word here.
Okay.
Yeah.
And so those are the same.
These are the same but it's different for each sentence.
And then what I've done here is completely shuffle to get random vectors mapping onto random other vectors.
Now this result doesn't really it's not really interpretable because I'm picking random layers and random
pairs of tokens, but it's going to provide an interesting comparison to Harrison to see what is the
angle difference between randomly selected embeddings vectors.
So what I do is from the hidden states I take a random layer.
So I'm not just using this layer.
I'm literally picking a random layer excluding the embeddings, but any random transformer layer.
And then I'm also picking any random token.
So any random token from anywhere in the sentence and any random layer from anywhere in the model completely
random.
We do not expect any sensible results between these two vectors.
It's just a couple of randomly picked vectors, so it's going to be interesting to compare the magnitude
of these vectors that we see with the magnitude of vectors that we see here.
Okay.
So I can run that analysis.
This actually goes really fast.
Uh, because uh, yeah it can all be done on the CPU.
It's just some calculations.
Okay.
And then let's see.
So the sizes of this matrix angles is 48 for the transformer blocks.
And then 54 sentences and three of these analyses.
So target non-target and shuffled.
This is to convert from radians to angles.
I'm not going to run that just yet.
I want to show you the results first.
So here you see the results.
This is what I showed in the slides.
Now let me uncomment this.
So now we have also the completely shuffled angles randomly selected angles.
And you don't even see the average.
It's so much higher here.
So let me see.
I have to get rid of this uh y axis limit here.
Okay.
So we see that, uh, these randomly selected angles are much higher.
So in radians we get around 1.3, 31.4 or so radians.
That's actually pretty close to pi over two.
You can also see that these are just wild.
And this is not really surprising.
I mean these vectors are just pointing all over the place.
They're randomly selected pairs of tokens.
And one thing I wanted to point out here is just the way I set up this analysis, maybe a little bit
lazy, but it is actually possible.
Let me show you this without me.
So here we get.
We're probably going to get a couple up.
We didn't get any missing data points.
Let me try this again.
Sometimes when you run this analysis, you will get missing data points in the green lines.
And that happens because.
Okay.
Here we go randomly.
It can happen that you get these two in the shuffled and the randomly selected pairs.
These two can be exactly the same vectors just by chance.
And when that happens we just run into some numerical problems.
We get some Nan values.
And so therefore I just take the Nan mean.
So next I'm going to statistically evaluate.
Let me go back to this visualization.
So yeah here when we look at this result it seems like the uh the non-targets have a higher angle than
the targets early on.
And that, uh, pattern flips later on.
So then I did a statistical analysis to evaluate that.
So I grabbed all of the angles for, uh, zero and one that corresponds to the target tokens and the
non-target tokens.
I'm not doing any analyses on the randomly selected pairs, because I don't think it makes sense to
do that.
Uh, statistical analysis.
Okay.
And then, yeah, I'm using a threshold of 0.05 divided by the number of hidden layers.
So basically it's Bonferroni corrected p values Because we are doing so many comparisons here, and
these are the results that I showed in the slides.
Okay.
The last thing I want to show here is changing all of these angles from radians to degrees.
This should say degrees here.
Now, it probably would be better if I would create a new variable and call this like degrees.
But then I would need to do new plotting code and I didn't feel like doing that.
So now I've overwritten all of these results.
But that's fine.
This takes literally one second to run.
Okay, so now we have data in angles instead of in radians.
And the whole point of me doing that is that it's just a little bit easier for a lot of people to interpret.
So we see that the change, the difference in angle between these randomly selected pairs is somewhere
around 70 to 80 Degrees and remember that 90 degrees would correspond to exactly orthogonal.
Completely orthogonal vectors.
Now in a high dimensional space.
Random vectors are likely to be orthogonal to each other.
So the fact that this.
These random pairs are almost but not quite orthogonal, they are a little bit correlated with each
other.
That actually is consistent with the bias towards positive cosine similarities in the GPT two tokenizer
that we discovered very early in the course.
Okay.
And otherwise you see that the target and non-target.
So when we use exactly the same token, looking at the same token before versus after each transformer,
then the rotations are somewhere around ten degrees.
And again also interesting to see in the very beginning going from the initial embeddings.
So the token plus the position embeddings to the first transformer block there.
The change is almost 90 degrees, so it's a major rotation.
That's the first moment in the model where the context, the surrounding context, is loaded in and
modulates the angle of the embeddings vector for each token.
That's a pretty significant rotation there.
I've mentioned before that the field of mechanistic interpretability of LL is still fairly new, which
is a little bit frustrating sometimes, because it means that a lot of the interpretations are speculative
and going to change over time as new theories develop, a new research comes out.
But the nation see of this field is also exciting, because it means that a lot of work remains to be
done, and a lot of concepts that you might have learned about in linear algebra or machine learning
or calculus can be relevant here for understanding.
Now, one of the situations where you see this phenomenon is that sometimes we do analyses where it
seems like the representations inside the model transition smoothly and slowly across the transformer
blocks, whereas other analyses seem to suggest that there are sudden discontinuous jumps in processing.
Of course, both of those statements can be true because these are such complex systems and they implement
many calculations at the same time and distributed in different ways.
Anyway, I hope you are looking forward to the code challenge in the next video where you will follow
up on these ideas by calculating angles not just between layers, but between tokens within each sentence.